Hello there.
This is the Rue.
And welcome back.
So let's now go ahead and look at the different Java SE releases.
So in the last lecture we got a good understanding of the Java Sea.
Like an overview of Java Sea.
And it has many releases over the years.
In this lecture, we will look at the different releases and the release cycle, like how often a release
is being made and generally what comes out in the release.
And also a little bit about the history of the releases.
So here we are.
In a given year.
Currently they are doing two releases, one in March and one in September, for instance, in 2019.
In March, they released Java as a tool.
So along with that, all of the providers will also try to write to try to come up with a JDK implementation.
Like the Oracle, Amazon, the Open JDK, Oracle and so on.
So here this was released in March 2019, which is the specifications, and the JDC would come separately
and Java 13 was released in September.
So every year they are doing one release in March and one in September.
So that's a six month release cycle.
And this six month release cycle started from Java ten onwards, and before that the releases were much
less frequent.
So they used to release anywhere from once every 2 to 5 years.
For instance, Java six came out in 2006, seven came out in 2011.
So there is a gap of five years and eight in 14 and nine and 17.
So the problem with this is Java was evolving very slowly, right?
While other platforms and other programming languages were evolving very quickly.
So they were doing releases very quickly.
So Java is not like was not like that.
It was very slow and was not as agile as other platforms or programming languages.
Because of that, the, the innovation was kind of slow, so they wanted to make it faster.
So the reason why it used to happen is because the designers were always trying to bring out large,
big features in every release.
For instance, in eight there were Lambda Lambda expressions and eight was a very huge release.
Similarly, in nine, they had something called as modules of the Java platform module system, which
was also a very huge change.
So they have certain deadlines to meet, but because those features are so complex, the deadlines were
constantly getting extended and the release was not happening.
But the problem with that is in a release, apart from this big features, there would also be some
smaller features and which are completed, but we are unable to use it because the release itself is
not happening.
So the release was stopping those small features to see the light.
So we are unable to use those small features.
So the Java designers wanted to change that and so they decided to do frequent releases from Java ten
onwards.
But the thing the difference is that in each release they will only have fewer features coming out.
Like if there are any smaller features, they would come out.
But the larger features will also come out in one of the releases.
But in each release you will see you will see only few changes being made.
So that's the thing.
So they wanted to be agile like all other platforms to.
So here this particular document shows only till Java six, but before Java six, there were also five
other releases, five or six releases and dating back to 96 when Java came into existence.
So in the first versions like the Java one, Java two and so on, so the Java one was initially called
as was called as JDK one, and then there was JDK 1.1 which came out in 97, and the next version was
J to as I recall, the Java Sea was earlier called J2 SC.
So they had some inconsistent version numbers like J.
SC 1.2, 1.3 and so on.
So the naming was very inconsistent, but in this course, let's call them as Java one, Java 1.1,
Java two, Java three, Java six, Java seven, and so on.
And I think everybody can understand that.
So in the initial versions, let me just give you an idea about what came out in those initial versions.
So before Java six, like in Java one and Java 1.1, they had only a few hundred classes.
Recall that each release comes with the Java Library, and the Java Library had only a few hundred classes,
and the platform itself in Java one on 1.1 was pretty slow.
Then Java two came out and it was a major release with addition of a significant number of new classes.
So there were a large number of classes that got added and more importantly, it was faster to, as
it included the compiler.
Then after that, Java five came out in around 2004, it was also a pretty huge release.
In between there were Java three and Java four, but probably they are not that significant.
Java five was really huge with new additions like generics and some new multithreading features, and
it had close to 2500 classes.
Then later, Java six, which we can see here, has come out.
It did not add much to the language itself, but had some important changes in the Java.
So sometimes in certain releases you will have you will see more changes in Java and fewer language
changes.
But now in the recent releases, you know, it's mostly smaller features that are coming out.
For instance, here.
And some of them are preview features.
For example, switch expressions was added as a preview feature, but later.
So it was a preview feature in Java 13 also.
But in Java 14 it became a permanent feature of the language.
There is something called switch expressions, so some of them are released as preview features.
They are not standard and they may be removed in the next release too.
If the if developers do not like them and they get the feedback that it's not good, so they might they
might remove the feature.
So that's about it.
And next we will install one of the latest versions of Java SE implementation.
So we'll install a JDK and we will get started.
Thank you and see you in the next lecture.